Hi everyone, welcome to this week's episode of No Such Things A Fish, where we were joined
by our very good friend, who we've known for many many years, Cariad Lloyd.
Now before I remind you about Cariad, I want to tell you that she has a potty potty mouth.
We have bleeped out some things in this show, but if you want to hear everything that was
said, it's a bit of a joke, I'll tell you that.
Then you have to go to patreon.com/clubfish and join our plenty more fish here, where you
get an xl episode of every single show, and in this one it is the full, unbleaped, unedited
version.
So I really hope you enjoy that.
But either way, Cariad Lloyd, what can I say about her?
She is in the improv group ostentatious.
She has got her own podcast, she's got the Weirdos Book Club with friend of the podcast
Sarah Pasco.
She also has the grief cast, and she has written lots of books, including her most recent
kids book.
It is called Where Did She Go?
Now this is a book, very important.
This will teach your kids about death in a nice way, in a friendly way, in a story book way,
but it's absolutely brilliant.
It's such a clever book.
It's so well done.
It works brilliantly as a story.
It works brilliantly as a kids book, but it has a message behind it.
Highly recommend if you have children that you get that.
We all have a copy.
Cariad brought some in for us, so we're very, very blessed to have got those.
But yeah, Cariad is an absolutely brilliant performer.
You will have seen her on absolutely everything in the UK.
And no wonder because she is amazing.
Really hope you enjoyed this week's show.
No more to say apart from on with the podcast.
Hello and welcome to another episode of No Such Thing as a Fish, a weekly podcast coming
to you from the QI offices in Hobern.
My name is Dan Schreiber.
I am sitting here with James Harkin, Andrew Hunter Murray, and Cariad Lloyd.
And once again, we have gathered around the microphones with our four favorite facts
from the last seven days, and in no particular order, here we go.
Starting with fact number one, and that is my fact.
My fact this week is that the idea to bleep and censor words during live TV and radio
broadcasts began over a hundred years ago, and was all because of one woman and her nursery
rhymes.
Yeah.
So this is Olga Petrova.
This was an actor who has a very interesting story, but why don't we talk about the censorship
thing first?
Because that's a real hot topic these days.
It's been in the news very recently, the BAFTAs, when there was...
What happened?
You know, it had a guy with Tourette's.
I don't know.
He said so.
Yes.
John Davidson, who a movie was made on him, well, things weren't bleep because I understand
it.
Are they bleeped?
Are they left that word in and was the...
Oh, Lordy Lord.
Controversy that bleeped.
Yeah.
Oh, it's stunning.
It's so good.
It's really heart-wrenching.
Yeah.
Really?
And it was a complicated moment at the BAFTAs, but it shows that this is a thing that's
constantly in the news because on live TV, how do you stop that?
So when this woman read out these nursery rhymes in 1921, what was the word that was bleeped
out?
Was it...
Or was it...
And then Jane's, I'm happy.
I'm happy with that.
I can't...
I don't want people hearing it.
I've said those words on it.
I think it was worse.
I think it was...
No.
1921.
It was a fine word back then.
I know you say...
Yeah.
But we're not allowed to say...
You say...
Not anymore.
Oh.
That's a shocker.
That's interesting.
Anyway, so this was 1921.
It was on Newark radio station and Olga Petrova, who come on to read this nursery rhyme.
And the rhyme went something like this.
There was an old lady who lived in a shoe.
She had so many children because she didn't know what to do.
Now this was a very sneaky reference to birth control.
She was very good friends with Margaret Sanger, who was the founder of the American birth control
league.
And they all freaked out when she said this because it was a sort of blink and you miss
it moment, but they certainly got it.
So the normal rhyme is...
There was no woman who lived in a shoe.
She had so many children.
She didn't know what to do.
Yeah, but I think the word "because" really changes a little bit.
Yeah, yeah.
She had so many children because she didn't know what to do.
Yeah.
So they freaked out because they thought if the networks heard this, they would shut down
their radio station.
Another thing is that they just had World War One and there'd be loads of restrictions
about what you're allowed to say on radio.
And they just lifted all the restrictions and said, "Okay, you're allowed to say...
"Beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep.
So they were really worried that if she said anything that was really dodgy, then they would
just go back to the old ways.
Yes, exactly.
So I do love the story of Olga Petrova-Den.
You mentioned briefly that Olga Petrova was actually a stage name and her original name was Muriel, Muriel Harding.
She was from Hampshire.
That's really interesting.
She pretended she'd been born in Warsaw.
It was all complete rubbish.
And she also did the accent, her whole professional life.
Yeah. She pretended to be, like, suddenly from European accent.
Wow.
I'm pretty amazing, that, isn't it, that she did. No one knew that.
It wasn't like, she wasn't day-medna-everage, you know?
It wasn't a character that people knew about.
She really claimed to be this.
And she was a big actor in her time, both in the theater, where she was also a playwright
and in movies.
She actually starred in a movie that was directed by friend of the podcast, A Guy.
Oh, remember, A Guy, Ellis Guy, who is the first female director ever.
She did The Tigress, which was a movie by A Guy, yeah.
So a fascinating character who is responsible for all the bleeping, who then has this extraordinary
background story.
So just to go back to the original thing that happened, when she said she had so many
children because she didn't know what to do, they didn't bleep that.
What they did was they put some music on really loud, so you couldn't hear her microphone
anymore, basically.
Yeah.
And then end of Oscar's get off, they did this.
Exactly like that.
And then it was a bit later down the line that they came up with a bleep idea.
And what I couldn't work out with Radio was there was another engineer who was playing
classical music.
Now, in 1921, is that recorded music or is that someone literally live on a violin just
waiting?
I think it would be someone playing a disc or recording.
No, they had classical music playing constantly on another line.
And if someone said anything controversial, they just press the button and go to the other
line.
So they were prepared for something controversial then?
They knew that something you needed.
They were constantly playing classical music on another.
It's so weird.
Actually, on classic FM, they're just effing and jeffing over time.
Yeah, so the tunes are swearing.
Come on.
It's so funny.
I think so.
I think that was the innovation after this very first time.
So they thought, right, we need a constant background.
Yeah, yeah.
A satinette ready to go.
And then slowly that evolved to become the modern day bleep or how sometimes if you're just
watching a broadcast or just go to silence because that's another issue.
Well, they mute it.
No, don't they?
Or it's more common to mute it because a bleep is quite a funny sound.
And it also draws attention to what's just been said.
Yeah.
If you weren't really paying attention, a bleep really draws your attention.
And so, shows like Jerry Springer used it to great effect because they noticed that when they
were getting lots of bleeps in a show, the ratings were higher and people enjoyed watching
this.
Yeah.
On QI, we've been told in the past we can't just bleep things.
If they're offensive enough, you just can't put them out because people still know.
People still know really.
I think the rules are a little bit like case by case based on the context.
My favorite things about this whole territory.
And we kind of touched on this when we heard Michael Palinon, ages ago, talking about censorship
because Monty Python had done a lot, was that comedy writers in particular actively tried
to sneak stuff past the censors back in the day.
And I was reading in America, this was a big thing on Morgan Mindy.
So what's that?
Robin Williams?
Robin Williams sitcom.
Yeah, he's an alien who's arrived on Earth and it's a sitcom about him being on Earth.
Oh, so good.
Oh, it's wonderful.
Yeah.
So, he himself, this wasn't the story I was going to tell, but he himself used to sneak
in foreign language swear words.
Oh, yeah.
And so, they used to have a censor who had to have a grasp of multiple languages in order
to understand what he was sneaking through, much like in tennis, you know, how the
officials often have to learn those multiple languages.
But the writing team, it's very hard.
It's very hard.
Tolly Glott, you know, what's Robin Williams been reading this week?
Which, which have seen dictionary has he been reading?
Yes, exactly.
Well, that's the thing.
They obviously didn't have too much of a grasp because the Morgan Mindy team actually
managed to get a character onto the show.
I think it was just for one episode, but he was called Arnold Wanker.
And Arnold Wanker.
Well, like, which is that reading.
So, when that episode played in the UK, they did censor it, but it got away in America.
That's so funny.
Wow.
So, what you've done before there was American sci-fi magazine called Servants of the Wank, wasn't
it?
Yes.
That was with the nature.
It was.
Yes.
It was really servants of the wanker.
What was the other one?
The knobhead.
Slanted of the knobhead.
I know.
Do you see the knob meeting when they just didn't know?
They just, yeah.
Oh.
The guy, by the way, who played Arnold Wanker was called Logan Ramsay.
And his dad was in the military, and he's the man who sounded the alarm for the attack
on Pearl Harbor.
Just a random connection.
That's an incredible fact.
He sent more than a big bleep that he did.
Who's a child?
Yeah.
He was the one who wrote what apparently is the most famous messages from that signal,
saying, air raid, Pearl Harbor.
This is no drill.
That was from Arnold Wanker's dad who he didn't invent.
This is not a drill, though.
Did he?
Not sure.
Okay.
I think that was René McGreeetz, wasn't it?
Very nice.
Just where you're talking about swear words, and because I am in ostentatious as Andy used
to be, would you like some regency swear words?
Oh, yeah.
I just saw, because I think the other thing that's funny about swear words, a lot of English
ones, have been around a long time.
Some of them have gone.
So if I give you adventurous, what do you think an adventurous is, do you know that?
I feel like that's somebody hunt for rich elderly men and hopes they die.
No, it's just a use of feminism for prostitute or woman.
But adventurous is nice.
It's cool there.
Yeah.
Cool, don't go down that area.
There's a couple of adventures.
Yeah.
It's MaguPy.
MaguPy.
Oh my gosh.
Is that part of the anatomy?
No.
Oh, good.
Oh, it's not.
MaguPy?
No.
It just lowers it below.
Yeah.
MaguPy.
Oh, right.
You're a MaguPy.
That's nice.
I think MaguPy's world wants MaguPy's.
Oh, maybe.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
I think so.
When do you think Kiss My Ass came in?
Kiss My Ass.
Yeah.
I think it's interesting that some of these have been around a very long time.
Because they do the job so well.
You don't.
They haven't changed.
Yeah.
Can I tell you a thing about nursery rhymes?
There was a lot of concern that nursery rhymes were too horrible for children.
A lot of them are.
Most of them are.
Actually, 90% are.
But there was an outfit that set up, I think, in various sources say it's either Victorian
or 20th century.
It was definitely trading in the 1940s, but it was the British Society for nursery rhyme
reform.
They became reform.
It starts with nursery rhymes.
Also, there's about a blah, blah, black sheep.
Not sure about that.
Basically, the Alan the Pussycat came to see in a tidy boat.
And it was set up by the two Jeffries, Geoffrey Hall and Geoffrey Handley Taylor.
And I can only find two works that were written by them.
New rhymes for old, which was basically a new version of nursery rhymes.
Things like...
They had the original work, but great.
Is that what we're saying?
They kind of were.
Yeah.
Three kind mice was one of those.
Oh, very good.
I mean, that one is really bad.
Is it?
Yeah, three blind mice.
I don't remember.
Three blind mice.
See how they run.
They all run after the farmer's wife.
She cut off some cheese with a cow.
She said tails with a cow.
Oh, I can't tell you about it.
I think it's fine.
Anyway, Geoffrey Hall was reported as saying about his work.
I don't like children very much, you know.
I really hate the nasty little brutes.
But I've got to live with them when they grow up.
So it's kind of...
Oh.
It's been a reformed children, so they don't turn into little brutes.
They have a service, yeah.
Interesting.
This carried on in the 20th century in America.
And in 1959, Senator Thomas C. Desmond found research that said 60% of young people thought
that old people were too old fashioned, sick and slow to catch on to new ideas.
And he blamed this on nursery rhymes.
And he said, like, for instance, the old woman who lived in the shoe at the end,
she whips the children.
And he thought that this nursery rhyme in particular, as some of the others,
were making people think that old people were witches or evil or cut tails off blind mice.
Right.
So it was demonizing old people.
Yeah.
There was enough positive representation of old people.
Exactly.
Where is the positive?
Yeah.
Old King Cole was a burial soul.
I'll give you that.
Yes, true.
A burial soul was he.
Well, lazy nursery rhyme.
A burial soul, a burial soul was he.
I'd send that back if I was the other two.
There's more to it.
So you've said it already.
Okay, there's time for fact number two.
And that is carried out.
Yes.
Contrary to what you maybe you were taught at school, or you know,
when Peter's diary was ignored for hundreds of years, and when they did finally translate it,
it turned out to be extremely racy and problematic.
Samuel Peep's, guys.
Samuel Peep.
Can we just quickly say, for international listeners who may not know Samuel Peep's?
Yes.
So, big deal in the 17th century,
helped run Britain's Navy administrator.
But the main reason he's famous is that he kept the diary for just 10 years of his life,
which covers a very eventful bit of English history,
which is the great plague, the great fire of London war against the Dutch,
which was a big national hobby back then,
and the restoration of the monarchy,
because Britain was coming out of a civil war,
executing the last king.
So it's an amazingly interesting time in English history.
When you say translated, it's not that he was writing a different language.
He was writing a coded kind of shorthand.
So if you've ever seen that, it's like a series of squiggles that stand in for letters or full words like there.
So it was a very common language.
And the Peep's wrote in a type of shorthand,
which was called Takia Graphi,
which was quite common at the time for parks.
Takia means fast, doesn't it?
Oh, okay.
I wonder how linked it is to like 20th century shorthand, you know.
But it looks very similar.
So he wrote in a kind of shorthand.
So for a long time, people didn't know what was in Peep's dies.
They just sat.
In 1818, another diary is published from a similar time,
by this guy called John Evelyn,
and it's extremely boring.
One of his quotes includes a rich gentleman visited me.
That's the kind of diary this man was publishing.
But it was a huge sensation.
Because people were obviously desperate for information about that time,
what how people were living.
And so the master of the library at that time is like,
"Oh, we got Peep's diary."
So he lends a copy of it, one copy to his uncle,
who lends it to another uncle,
who says, "Basically we need to translate this."
So they get this guy who's an undergraduate called John Smith,
who has 200 pounds to translate the complete everything in Peep's library.
Which is more words than Shakespeare.
What era is this now?
So now we are into around 1820, I think this is what we're talking.
And as he starts translating it, I said around 1820,
he discovers that basically a lot of stuff in this diary is not,
I'm watching the Great Fire London.
A lot of this stuff is about sex, there's loads of stuff about sex.
When they first published it, they keep some of the sex in,
they change the haurs to mistresses.
So they say that he's has mistresses.
Adventureesses.
Adventureesses, indeed.
And they keep some of it, but apparently there's constant edits on the book,
saying OBJ objectionable.
So they were worried about, they basically tried to,
it's a cover-up, it's a white watch.
They wanted him to seem like a moral figure.
And when you're in primary school in this country,
you study the Great Fire London.
And still to this day, my kids have had to study Samuel Peep's.
It's a very big thing because he wrote this diary.
He's famous for burying his wine and his parmesan in his garden.
So that's what my boys have said to me.
Cheers, Barry.
It's like an interesting fact.
And he sold to you, I would say, as a kid in this country,
it's like, oh, you know, there's like Charles Dickens,
there's Jane Austen, there's Shakespeare, there's Samuel Peep's.
Like, no, he's like one of our figures, you know, really important.
But yeah, he has a lot of sex.
He assaults a lot of teenage girls.
His poor wife is having to cope with all this.
He married her, I think she was about 15.
She was 14.
Which even at the time was young, I know it's sometimes forget.
But at that time, he was 22, she was 14.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
She finds out about his, one of his affairs,
and refuses to wash or eat for quite a while,
which really pisses him off.
But his favourite thing to do is to sleep with men in the Navy's wives.
Oh, right.
But the men are away, he's sent them away.
He's in charge of Naval Administration.
He knows where they are.
He knows when they come in back.
And then he sleeps with the wives.
He's also a bit extorted sometimes.
Yes, it's a bribe sometimes.
I won't put your husband in the Navy.
Yeah.
Your husband won't have to go with the press gang and be away for years,
if you sleep with me.
So it's very horrible.
And he does also have a entry where he talks about masturbating in church
while thinking of his friend's daughter.
God, forgive me, he writes.
I can't tell if Andy's disgusted with that.
Say, we've all done it smile.
Hello.
Hello, we've all masturbated in church about our friend's daughter.
In fairness, he is like saving time because he's in church already
and he's asking forgiveness at the same time.
Yes, that's true.
That's to be learned there.
And it's very problematic.
Although other people argue this amazing new book
called The Strange History of Samuel Pieces Diary by Kate Loveman,
she argues that the way he's writing about it is it's unclear how assault-based it is,
but obviously he's not.
Because he didn't write in his diary how much consent was involved.
Well, yeah, obviously it's deeply difficult for us to put that on the past.
All I'm saying is more like Samuel Creeps.
Yep.
Very nice.
You've been waiting.
That was worth it.
I'll tell you one person he definitely didn't get consent from was the queen he kissed,
which was Queen Catherine of France, unable to give consent because she died something
like nearly 200 years before.
So he was in Westminster Abbey on Shrove Tuesday in 1669.
He's the right one.
Put it this way.
Yeah, basically he was visiting her coffin was there and the lid had cracked and it became exposed.
And the top half of her body was there and he wrote in his diary and I did kiss her mouth.
Reflecting upon it, I did kiss a queen.
And this my birthday and I 36 year old and I did kiss a queen.
Oh my god.
Did he ask forgiveness for that as well?
No.
And it's the thing it's like the first said it comes in 1825 and you know they really tied it him up.
They wanted him to appear morally serious.
We don't get the full translation of all nine volumes till 1971.
So people don't really know what he's been up to until the 20th century.
But he's again a bit like Dickens who also you know has problematic behaviour.
I find it weird that we teach children about this matter.
I think if you're not going to teach children about any problematic people from history,
there's going to be a short lesson.
These two to those short lessons James.
Dancing and reading of nursery rhymes.
But not those nursery rhymes.
Kind of ice.
But you just have to teach well I mean to really young children.
But it's weird to do it at primary school.
I guess that's what I think that you could definitely say oh we have this start.
There must be other things from the great five London.
He's so important in that section of primary school.
I think it's because his sort of the sourcing is you know we don't have as much.
And it's just yeah.
I think one thing that's interesting about him is the only thing we really know about him is this diary.
So he must be one of the only people in history where the entire understanding of his character comes from his own words.
Yeah.
Like he could have made all that stuff up.
Well also they say in the diary it's very clear he didn't he wasn't writing it for posterity.
It's not one of those diaries.
He used to keep things in there that he couldn't keep in like his household legends.
So it's like who's bribing who owes him a dinner.
So it's like it's very personal record.
He also ducks into other languages.
Even within his shorthand he will if he's describing something especially outrageous.
You know I did I did make her tenor Mikosa in her mano.
Right.
So that's whole thing and hand.
But it's not it's not a very sophisticated.
This is not the enigma code we're talking about.
Yeah.
He does he does change languages but he's also writing as said in a code anyway and then putting it in another code.
And he also writes in euphemisms quite a lot.
So which of these do you think is about sexy stuff.
Did do as much as was safe.
Oh yeah.
Toss and tumble and take a boat to Greenwich with Captain Cox.
Never take a boat to Greenwich.
I would never do something like that.
Captain Cox.
We're Captain Cox.
Have the three things that I said the last one is the only one that wasn't the euphemism.
I really caught a tumble and what was that?
Did as much as was safe.
They also think he was infertile because he had he actually had a huge gall bladder gall stone removed.
Like and survived that operation which he kept at the size of a tennis ball and they think that maybe because he worried about pregnancy.
He doesn't seem to have had any children.
He died with his wife and a children.
He used to throw a party every year.
Every year to commemorate.
Yeah.
What a weird guy.
I think the painful procedure with lots of people died.
His first entry is saying I feel exultant.
It is out.
I really am.
I mean only stops because of his eyesight.
That's the only reason he stops.
Yes, so why was he worried about his eyesight?
Too much time in church.
He was time in church.
His wife had one portrait done of her.
It's a really nice portrait.
I've seen it.
She was Elizabeth, wasn't she?
She was San Michelle, wasn't she?
Yeah.
And she was French.
And it was a really nice portrait.
It was destroyed in 1830 by a Scottish nurse who thought it showed too much cleavage.
Wow.
And I've seen it and it does not.
I'm not saying how much is too much but I'm just saying it is for the 1830s.
That's true.
I'm sorry.
In a agency period there was a fashion to have tops that came down to the top of your nipples.
That was quite a lady's fashion.
So Queen Elizabeth was sometimes whabs out at court.
For that sake even earlier.
Yeah.
I think we did.
We didn't see what top of nipples was a bit of a trend at one point.
I think we did a fact on the show once about the fact that on a makeup table a woman would have nipple makeup as well.
Because it was such a thing that you would be seeing on a day-to-day occurrence.
Yeah.
Gosh.
Interesting.
Yeah, the window to the soul.
And then she found him indecently engaged with his maid.
Yes.
So I read the diary from that day when it happened.
He says my wife was struck mute and grew angry about two in the morning.
Wakes me and cried and fell to tell me a great secret that she was a Roman Catholic and had received the holy sacraments.
So he's actually hurtful.
Is that what's the implication?
No, it's not.
Apparently she was constantly threatening to return to Catholicism.
So yeah, basically.
And he was always stressed about it.
You can't be.
You're getting trouble.
And he's like, the next two or three days, he's basically like, my wife's still upset.
Yeah.
My wife's still quite upset.
And he only calls her my wife.
He's just referred to you since he's not even named her.
I try to think it's a bit dubious.
What?
I just think if you only ever referred to your wife as my wife, that's not a very loving sign.
Yes, I agree.
Especially if you do it in a novel accent like that.
My wife.
Because you see that Northern and Borat are the two my wives.
You shouldn't do it unless you're from the North.
That's the clue for you.
In a book where he sleeps with so many women per day.
I'm saying he can't even remember her.
I'm saying there are plenty.
I'm saying there's a lot of red flags in history.
At one point, I think he's describing a biography as prowling like an animal round Westminster
to find girls to sleep with.
Yes.
All the animals that I've seen prowling round Westminster are foxes.
Wow.
So was he going round Ben's as well?
I think so, yeah.
He's kind of very, yeah.
It is interesting.
A lot of historians, despite all of this information, I read an article by Max Hastings,
who sort of says a lot of people do read peeps as a person of his time.
This was largely happening.
A lot of men were going away to war.
People were sleeping with wides and so on.
If there was a diary of Henry VIII, it would be very interesting to read it.
Oh gosh, yeah.
Be fascinating.
And I also think it's interesting about peeps as he didn't start.
He didn't come from, you know, a great family situation.
His mother was a laundry maid.
He was one of ten children.
He's number five.
And he's the only one who survived the oldest into adulthood.
And he worked his way up through the system.
So he's a very interesting character.
I suppose I think what is so interesting is I was taught him so much at primary school.
Yeah.
I would, I feel like he might be a secondary school thing too.
Yeah, you're right.
But it came in handy in your career because you were in, of course, peep show.
Okay, it is time for fact number three.
And that is Andy.
My fact is, one of the first fiber optic networks in London was built in tubes
that used to do the safety curtains in London's theaters.
So you know the old iron curtain that goes down for the interval enough?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Sure.
Big heavy things.
Safety curtains to prevent fires in theaters.
Yeah.
They were all operated by hydraulics.
Right.
Flash forward to the 1980s.
Where were we the first time?
Oh, we were the, let's say the 1880s.
Oh, okay.
That's hell of a flash.
Yeah, it was actually.
But that's okay.
All right.
You don't need to tell us about that.
It's about an hundred years.
No.
But basically in the 1980s fiber optic networks were all setting up shop, right?
And it was BT, which had their own network.
And they had all their own tunnels.
They had, you know, the old sort of post office tunnels.
And they're all there ducts under the city.
So if they wanted to put in telecommunications stuff, they had their own network.
But other companies were being allowed in on the act.
And one of them was Mercury, which was setting up another network.
Mercury communications.
They sort of privatized, like just private firm.
Yeah.
They needed some network of channels under London that they could use.
And they didn't have any.
And then they had this realization.
There was this thing called the London Hydraulic Power Company,
which had operated this massive network under London in the 19th and 20th centuries.
And it used huge amounts of hydraulic power to operate massive machinery.
So like cranes down at the docks, all the safety curtains in theaters,
car hoists and garages, all of it was operated by hydraulic power.
Cool.
It's just so cool, like weird, but amazing.
Where's it come? Where's the powers big?
They draw the water out of the river and they heated up a bit.
And they use the water pressure to operate massive machines.
And you can just plug it.
You're like, I'm just going to use that.
You can plug in the hydraulic network.
It's crazy.
The hydraulic just means if I push some water here and there's a big old tube,
then it'll push it at the end of the tube as well.
Yeah.
It's just so weird.
And basically this system had gone out of business in,
it lasted a surprisingly long time till like the 70s or something insane like that.
But this network was available.
And so they just shoved all the fiber optics through these hydraulic tubes.
Cool.
Crafty.
And so these are not like the wires that send the fiber optics stuff.
The wires go inside the tubes, I think.
Yes.
Because fiber optics are basically made of glass.
They're like glass wires and the light sort of bounces off it.
And like instead of, I mean hydraulics where water goes through it,
you've got light going through it and then you fire pulses of light.
And then your computer can read the pulses.
It's insane.
So underground instead of the water power.
No, the light is bouncing off the glass.
It's mad.
What?
The whole world works on this basis now.
I know.
Arnold Wanker would not believe how the world has changed.
It's amazing this technology when you read into it.
It seems so wizardly.
It just doesn't seem real.
And a new record, speed record was recently set for data transmission using commercially installed fiber optic cables.
They transferred 450 terabytes per second.
What that translates is roughly 50 million movies could be streamed simultaneously with this amount of data.
You could watch.
Now you see me too.
50 million times at the same time.
Exactly.
But that's basically all the tabs that I've got.
Oh, my God.
Yeah.
One of the big names in this, because weirdly, you'd think that the inventor of fiber optics would be a household name,
given how much this is changing the world.
But Narendra Singh Kapani, born in 1926, he lived in an Indian city, very know the Himalayas.
And his science teacher, when he was a kid, told him that light only travels in straight lines.
And he said, I don't think that's right.
And he spent the rest of his life looking into that effectively.
It was to get back at his teacher that he became interested in this territory.
Yeah.
It's such a personal deep bend.
And how we benefited from that kind of absolute stubbornness is wonderful.
Yeah.
I think him fairness to him unless you got an enormous gravitational pull light does go in a straight line.
Yeah, exactly. But so what he became a corner weeping was true in context.
What he became obsessed with, which is what is fiber optic, is, as you said, James, the bouncing of the light.
And how do you manage to do that?
So that it doesn't stop, that it finds any angle that you can go around.
You can bounce it around the corner, basically, can't you?
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
It's really cool.
And you know who is a household name who was quite important in this Alexander Graham Bell?
Oh.
He always turns up, doesn't he? It's communication.
What did he?
Well, he invented something called the photo phone and that transmitted voice signals on a beam of light.
So you would speak and then your voice waves would hit him mirror.
They would create vibrations and then the light would vibrate and then it would go to another place
which would work out what the vibrations are and turn it back into sound again.
Wow.
And he thought it was the best invention of all his inventions.
But that specifically didn't take off, right?
No, because basically it would just be so garbled you'd hardly be able to hear it.
The amount of data you would lose from that signal is just way too much.
Right.
It just really wouldn't work.
That was the thing that had to be conquered, basically.
Yeah.
So there was the problem was you had copper phone lines for communication, which didn't have nearly enough capacity.
And then you had microwave towers, like we talked about the BT tower ages ago.
That's what kind of they used.
And then they thought, what about lasers? Could that work?
Yeah. And basically what and what medium does the light travel through best?
And someone suggested optical fibers, but you would lose 90% of the power every 10 meters.
It just wouldn't work.
Yeah.
And then a scientist called Charles Cowell in the 60s.
He was working at a really stodgy British research outfit called standard telecommunications laboratories.
And he and a colleague called George Rockham, they worked out how to reduce the light loss and make the glass purer.
And suddenly you could transmit signals a long way along glass.
And everyone else thought, no, this isn't the future at the time.
And Charles Cowell insisted, no, fused silica is the way.
It is the way we're going to communicate.
And he was absolutely right.
And he won the Nobel Prize for it.
Yeah.
You know, decades later.
Oh, okay. He got his flowers.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, he absolutely did.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But like, you know, it's.
And now we got these things underneath all the oceans.
Yeah.
And that's how we can do a zoom to America.
It's extraordinary.
Yeah, whatever.
They've just laid these cables all over the planet.
It's not right.
It doesn't feel right.
And they're covered in kevlar as well.
Oh, I don't like it.
You're worried about it.
Three blind voices killed by fiber optics.
No, it just sounds.
It's one of those things that modern technology does at the time that you don't really understand it.
And when someone explains it to you, your head explodes a bit of like, oh shit, that's what's happening.
But you're just like, yeah, yeah, I'm zooming someone from San Francisco.
Yeah.
I don't know how that works.
I assume it's like a phone.
Yeah.
You've got these cables under the water, right?
What do you think damages them?
Fish.
Specifically large fish.
Angry fish.
Well, it's angry fish.
Well, that's what I would call a larger angry fish as well.
In actual fact, it's always said that that's true, but that is not true.
It's not.
If I said shark, it's going to go, we don't do that on this.
When you're on QI next year, and look out for that one, because it's not all bleeps.
Yeah.
This is nautical and wired by someone called Jane Raffino.
And it's basically sharks do not eat wires.
And what?
With this.
Yeah.
But we thought like, because there's electricity going through them maybe and they have electroreceptors.
Maybe they would do that.
But not only does it not really happen, we know where the myth comes from.
And it was someone about 40 years ago who had a new cable that was going between Canary Islands.
They were testing it out.
And it wasn't really working.
And they weren't sure what was causing the problem.
And this person, this woman called Elaine Stafford, had to go to Paris to do a presentation about it.
And she was like, well, what am I going to say about the stuff that doesn't really work?
And her boss said, well, we've noticed that there's some shark teeth marks on there.
So just say it sharks.
And she said it was sharks.
And then the myth took hold there.
But since then they've tested it.
They've literally got sharks and given the wires and said chew on this.
Right.
My diet is actually very special.
They're just not interested in it.
I do not want it.
Like, it turns out that sometimes sharks might bite them, but it's just an accident.
Sharks are such a full guy to the humans.
But if I saw a fiber optic cable advertised, then I was in the market for like a 5,000 mile cable,
and I saw now shark proof, I would absolutely go for it.
I would not consider that it might not need to be dark proof.
Well, it kind of is pitched like that because they do put Kevlar over it for reasons of being bitten or ripped apart under the ocean.
So the cables under the ocean have Kevlar.
But they do that because of this mess.
Yeah, exactly.
So they don't really need to do that.
So is there a danger?
Yeah.
I mean, the biggest danger would be if you were trying to take down the Western world, right?
Or the Easter world.
Oh, no, I just don't like the Western world.
You're very happy with Easter.
I don't tell your parts on the show.
It's really obvious.
It's definitely a thing that in warfare, people will try and snap each other's cables to set it up.
Yeah.
That is something that's currently happening in the Ukraine and Russia war.
Absolutely.
Which is that soldiers always carry on them at pair of scissors.
Because drones now use fiber optic.
So if they get a drone, they break into it and cut through the fiber optics in it.
So it can't send back messages and details of where it's being held.
But they're not carrying sharks with them to do that job.
That's true.
These cables that are running all around the world under the sea.
Obviously, there are a lot of them out there now.
And some of them are falling out of use.
So this year, the first ever fiber optic cable has been hauled back out of the ocean.
It entered service in 1988.
Wow.
Within 18 months, it was completely full to bursting with, you know, the capacity was used up.
It's crazy.
Transatlantic Telephone 8 is the name.
And there are now companies which are setting up shops saying, well, we're going to recycle this stuff.
It's got loads of copper in it.
It's really useful.
And there are, I think, three companies in the world which do subsea cable recovery.
Wow.
But if you're one of those three companies, there's loads of stuff out there that's not being used anymore.
It's a bit sad that something born in 1988 now has to be taken out and put to sleep because it's not working.
I think it's too full.
I'm roughly ready for that.
I was like, oh no.
Can I ask a question about the tech?
And this is one of those, it talks to me like I'm an idiot.
I'll do it never.
Never.
Dan, you have to tell them it's fine.
I've noticed they're really cool with it.
They're really fine.
It was as long.
Yeah.
So it's light bringing information, right?
The light converts the information into ones and zeros as it bounces along the tube.
What we receive on the other side, are we receiving a reconstructed version of that image?
We're getting zeros and ones.
Yeah.
Basically.
And then your computer knows what how to turn zeros and ones into everything else.
Because basically that means everyone's got a unique version that's being recreated on their end.
So it's rebuilding on every single different device.
Yes.
I mean, that's pretty extraordinary.
It's a unique creation.
There is a set of zeros and ones that equates to Jesse Eisenberg's face.
Yeah.
But how's it getting through the Wi-Fi?
There you go.
That's the next bit because I've got fiber optic, but it's not my computer's not plugged into it.
So then it's sending waves through the air.
From your router.
So the computer.
Radio waves.
Okay.
And then those waves that go up and down, up and down.
Oh, this is like the font.
This is like your comedy podcast.
I just felt my brain leave my body.
What we specialize in that too.
Yeah.
I think the good thing is that you don't have to understand it.
I know.
I just have a recurring anxiety that I will be the one that goes back in time and have to explain all this stuff to people of the past.
Oh, you know that wonderful t-shirt of a modern guy surrounded by ancient people and they're saying,
"But how do these antibiotics work?"
And he's saying, "I don't know."
Exactly.
Theatre, invention.
Oh, yeah.
In the 5th century BC, Easterless comes along and makes an incredible invention of theatre.
He introduces a second actor on stage.
The producer is saying, "We don't have the budget for it.
It isn't that amazing."
And so then you would only have one person erating the story.
Yeah.
He brings a second actor on.
One hundred years later, Suffolk Lee's comes along and introduces the third actor.
No.
It'll never work.
This suffocates.
It's crazy.
It's just for two people.
Max.
I want to see a jewel log.
We call it a love line.
Not a love triangle.
Was the third person a butler?
The third person was a way that you could interact between two different people without one of the knowing everything.
May I ask a question?
Where does the Greek chorus come in?
Sorry.
So you had the chorus and you would have one actor.
I see.
Oh, yeah.
And they would often, the chorus would often talk to one actor.
I see.
And they wouldn't talk to it.
And the messenger would come and deliver a monologue about what's happened.
They wouldn't often deliver it to the person.
They'd be like, I'm a messenger.
I've just told so and so.
Just told Zeus this.
Yeah, yeah.
Oh, wow.
That's fantastic.
Now, that would be a fun time travel.
Bring him back now to the future.
And he'd be like, oh, no, this has got way out of head.
What have I done?
Just show him gamer thrones.
Yeah.
Who's that guy?
We don't know.
No, we don't know.
You don't need to worry about it.
Just forget it.
Season six explains everything.
Okay, it is time for our final fact of the show.
And that is James.
Okay.
My fact this week is that embryos are muzzlely than you.
Very funny.
James was pointing at me for the listener at home.
And I'll take on any embryo and a fight.
They should put that on Netflix.
And what I've paid to watch.
One man goes to 100 embryos.
He will win.
This is a fairly recent study from Howard University in Washington, DC.
And they made some 3D images of human feces.
And found that we get extra muscles in our hands and feet when we're embryos and when we're feces.
And they disappear before we're born.
It's amazing.
And they're kind of muscles that you get in other animals like lizards have them.
And chimpanzees have them in their feet, which makes them more flexible.
Yeah, they can grab things.
Oh, so as adult chimpanzees, they'll have these muscles.
They absolutely do.
I didn't realize.
Because I thought it was a thing that no mammals had these.
Maybe it's the hand ones that have completely passed out.
Because that's a famous fact, doesn't it?
You don't have muscles in your fingers.
That's a very old QI fact.
Yeah, yeah.
The muscles that move your fingers are in your wrist.
Yes, but you used to have muscles in your fingers when you were in the womb.
Absolutely.
Yes, right.
That this doesn't come up on the first shots, you know, the ultrasounds that you get.
So these bodybuilder poses from your from your growing child.
Is it a boy?
And how much is he lifting?
So, unfortunately, these are just muscles in your hands and your feet.
It's not like big muscles and stuff.
That's the piceps, yeah.
There are apparently a few adults that have this.
They found one or two people that still have them that they didn't eat.
They didn't eat, but it doesn't really happen often.
And also it's quite a small sample size.
So we don't know for sure that it happens in all human embryos.
Could have been these lizard-y muscles were just found in members of the royal family.
Lovely.
I didn't see for the longest time were you going with that.
But yeah, it does seem likely that most, if not all, feats have these extra muscles.
Wow.
So cool.
And it's the idea that it's a hangover from when lizards were becoming mammals.
That is what they're saying, because they're found in lizards.
They're found in fish as well.
These muscles in their fins, but they're not found in mammals.
And we have a little tail as well, which sort of shows.
That's the like between the fourth and sixth weeks of growth.
Some of us still do.
Yeah.
Oh, swishy thing.
Like little tadpoles when you look at their very early feats.
Does it get absorbed back in?
I think it becomes your coccyx.
Yeah, that's what I've always said.
Oh, that tail, that tail, that it just kind of, yeah, becomes like your spine.
All these things are called developmental atavisms.
So mysterious.
It's weird that the body goes to the effort to make them and then merges them into something else.
Yeah.
Like rather than like, why waste your time, guys?
Well, it must be doing something that is there for a bit of time.
Yeah, quite often with these things is different genes that may call the different stuff.
So if you did turn that gene off, it might stop this from happening,
but it might stuff other stuff from growing at the same time.
Oh, yes.
I was looking at what happens at the very earliest moments of you being you.
So literally just after the fertilisation of an egg.
Okay.
Bumself fertilises an egg.
One of the very first initial phases of your life is showing a bit of cleavage.
Well, I'll take that.
That sounds more like me than you.
That's what the process is called.
When the single cell zygote, the fertilized cell, first thing it does is it divides itself into two.
Okay.
And then into four.
And that process is called cleavage.
And who named it that?
What male doctor said?
That looks like showing a bit of cleavage.
And it's actually, it's basically about to be an M-B-O.
So cleavage just means cutting, right?
Exactly.
And so the way I usually use the word cleavage is it like stonework.
I just didn't expect that end of that sentence to be that James.
If you get a piece of slate, the cleavage of it is how easily it cuts.
And actually the cleavage in your...
James, whatever turns you on, that's fine.
No one is shaming you here.
No kink shaming here.
It's slate, if it's clay.
What's up to you?
So the cleavage in your chest is a euphemism because people didn't want to use any other words for it.
So they used the stonework.
Oh, yes.
This is way older, isn't it?
But cleavage for stonework is way older.
Much healthier.
It's interesting.
We've had decoletage.
Yeah, that feels like an oldie.
Actually, that might be a full piece one or something.
Well, it's a French word for it, isn't it?
Yeah, but it's also a euphemism.
Like peeps did using foreign words.
Right, right, right.
All the terms are so cool.
I didn't understand plenty of them when I was reading these very detailed genetic descriptions of what individual cells are doing.
But you know, the primitive streak is something I want to say.
That shows that's the kind of...
It's a great band, they're really good.
It's again, you're a handful of cells at this point.
It's a structure that forms...
I'll put a line up and down.
Imagine a pear shape.
That's you at this stage and you get your a few cells.
And the primitive streak is this little line that goes up and down.
And it establishes bilateral symmetry.
So symmetry top to bottom.
That's what happens then.
Symmetry top to bottom is the first album, I think.
Would you not say more symmetry side to side than a human body rather than top to person?
Otherwise that sounds like you've got a head at the top and a head at the bottom.
Absolutely right, it's the opposite of what I was saying.
It's the opposite, it's the left of right symmetry, you're absolutely right.
I like the term, this is for a bit later in a pregnancy, but the quickening.
Oh, the quickening, yeah.
It's a cool term, old English term.
The feeling around 16 weeks of pregnancy when you get the flutters of movement of a baby.
They still call it that.
Yeah, they still sound like midwife still say, oh yeah, it's a quickening.
It's a quickening, it's not all midwives.
But I have heard that phrase.
It's been pregnant twice.
You wouldn't have pregnancy tests.
Exactly, and also you can't miss periods and not be pregnant.
So yeah, you'd need to wait for your quickening to know.
But you're feeling rough well before that, right?
Not everyone does.
Yeah, so some people have no, it's called morning sickness, but let me tell you it's 24 hours sickness.
Some people don't have it at all.
And that's how some people don't know their pregnant.
People have no symptoms.
That's the best magazine article ever written was had learned my dodgy kabab was a baby.
And I read that in love at magazine many years ago, and it stayed with me.
And he's later became Luke Lettle and the Nars player.
It's funny the pieces of prose that stay with you, isn't it?
It's weird. Everyone's had us this stuff in it, isn't it?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
We all knew Andy so well, and I want to read out one of his favourite pieces.
I thought it was a kabab, but it was a baby from love.
I must say the, I was blown away by fiber optics.
And I'm, I think even more blown away by the lifespan of an embryo.
And the fact that they can be frozen.
And the fact that there was a child born in 2020 who was born from an embryo that was frozen in 1992.
A 27 year distance between the two.
And it's, and it's really remarkable. And you can have multiple embryos from the same person,
which means that you, 27 years later, can have siblings born by using the embryos that are connected.
That's a body comedy. That's a body comedy. Sorry, that's a body comedy.
They're siblings, they're siblings, but they're 30 years apart and they also cops.
But yeah, I know not so bad.
They're cops.
I have friends who've had IVF and the eggs were fertilised at the same time.
But there's an age gap between the siblings, but really they were born at the, they were created at the same time.
Quite often they talk about themselves as twins, despite the fact that one's got a three year head start on them.
And they were there together at the same time, like so they were there when the same thing.
Can I just say that obviously you start off with a blaster paw, which becomes your anus.
And your anus tunnels its way through the rest of you to become your mouth.
And your blaster paw is a better name for an anus. Certainly.
Certainly in my experience on some night.
That was a cabab, that was there.
I'm sorry, it tunnels its way through you.
Yeah, because you've got the...
You're making it sound very sentient, like it's like come on guys.
Yeah, go, go, go.
But some animals start with the mouth and it tunnels backwards to become the anus.
That seems like the civilised way to do it.
Well, we unfortunately are the anus first.
I think we go, that's four of us.
Is it all mammals? I think so.
The Columbia division with the mammals.
And the other ones called you Teraflas or something.
Yes, that's right.
I know.
And part of you, again, when the one cell then two cells then four cells,
at the four cells stage is the last point where we are all the same.
And all the cells are identical.
Even at that point, like the next cell division to eight cells,
the cells have worked out, worked out, I'm being, you know, anthropomorphising there.
But like they've, I suppose they are humans.
But they've, the cells, this is, this is what a one person dialogue is like.
Yeah, yeah.
What is the chorus coming out?
I've sat in the chorus for a whole day time, I'm afraid.
So, even after those two divisions,
the cells have their genetic signature sorted out.
And they know whether they're going to be, be likely to come part of the fetus
or part of the placenta.
So half of those cells go off to be placenta cells.
Wow, that's amazing.
It's wild.
It is wild.
And then fetuses can send stuff through the placenta
that can become part of the mother, right?
Yeah.
That was one of the most amazing things I learned when we had kids.
So you, the embryo is a part of you.
There is a part of that baby in you.
And this is used a lot when you talk about miscarriage or baby loss.
So a lot of women feel like when they have a baby loss,
they feel like that baby is still with them.
That's kind of a euphemistic way.
And then they now have discovered they're literally is a part that embryo would have gone into the bloodstream
and remained as a mother.
The fetus can send stem cells through the placenta into the mother.
So let's say you get an injury,
the baby can send stem cells into your body
that can then turn into any part of tissue
and then can make you feel better.
Wow.
And if you have a C-section,
then your body needs to repair itself, right?
So we need skin cells that still stem cells in the placenta
from the baby that can come into your body
and become part of that scar from the C-section.
So it's like they're still, which is why.
We use phrases like it feels like you're with me.
It feels like your heart's been ripped out.
Also, if you have a Reese's negative blood,
or a negative blood,
and your embryo doesn't have that,
the first time you have a baby, that's fine.
But their blood goes into your blood.
Your body goes that's a foreign type of blood
and it starts attacking it.
Wow.
So this is what they used to cause.
Someone would have a healthy pregnancy
and then they'd have lots of miscarriages afterwards
and they would never understand why.
And it's because the mother had own negative blood.
The baby's blood wasn't own negative.
So every time they got pregnant again,
the body, her body would start attacking it going,
"This is like bad, we should get rid of it."
And now, if you're a Reese's negative like I am,
you have to have two special injections.
You have a injection while you're pregnant
and injection afterwards,
if your baby is not the same blood type.
Otherwise, your next pregnancy,
your body will literally go attack it.
Because they don't know what it is.
Extraordinary.
Whereas if your baby is the same blood type,
you're sharing the blood type.
It's fine.
Both my kids do not have the same blood type as me.
So I have to have this huge,
it's called anti-D injection.
And let me tell you,
it's a fucking huge needle.
That's insane that you created a thing that...
It's a different blood type.
That's wild.
I know that's probably just basic science.
But it does sound wild when you spell it out.
It is wild.
It's also annoying.
Yes.
You know, the best way of testing an egg?
For what?
Soft dog.
You put it in water and if it floats...
Yeah, yeah.
You need four minutes boiling and then 30 seconds in cold, I think.
So this is...
If you're doing IVF and you want a way of testing a fertilised egg,
you've got the eggs fertilised and you want to see how viable they might be.
The best method, or a really useful method,
is to just give it a squeeze.
With a difference?
Or they're too small to choose.
They're too small to squeeze with your fingers.
But I think you have a special...
And do that in the hardware.
Yeah, special little pincers.
It just has to be just right, basically.
It's not too firm, not too soft.
And that those...
Like an avocado.
And those eggs which squeeze back, which push back a bit,
you know, when pushed are likely to become...
To produce healthier embryos, basically.
So that's only been known for about 10 years.
That method.
Wow.
One more developmental atavism.
You have things called foringial arches in your face.
And they kind of help you to chew and help you to smile the little sort of muscles
or kind of swellings of tissue in your face.
They originally were the gills.
And we watched the hell.
When we were all fishes, we used them to breathe.
And we don't need them anymore.
So they've turned into things that help you express yourself with your eyes.
Wow.
So do different gills do that for fish?
Like a other fish looking going, "Oh, you look sad."
Oh?
I wonder if they're expressing themselves in a way we don't recognise.
Yeah.
And they're like, "God, dance a bit, grumpy to get his gills down in the gills."
Okay.
That's it.
That is all of our facts.
Thank you so much for listening.
If you'd like to get in contact with any of us about the things that we have said over the
course of this podcast, we can all be found online.
I'm on @Streiberland on Instagram.
Andy.
@AndryHunterRab.
James.
My Instagram is @NosieSinger'sJamesHarkin.
And CarrieHeads.
@CariHeadsLoyd.
Yeah.
CarrieHeads got a new book out at the moment.
Very exciting.
It is a kids book.
It's called Where Did She Go?
It's illustrated.
It's really beautiful.
You've got a few kids books out.
So the Lydia Marmelade is a middle grade book set in Jane Austen Times.
This is a kids picture book to talk to children about grief and death.
So it's like a way of having a story that helps you explain to a child perhaps what happens.
And this one's called Where Did She Go?
And it's illustrated by Tom Percival.
I'm also on tour with ostentatious.
And you can listen to my weirdo's book Podcast Wears, Friend of the Show, Sarah Pasco.
Yes.
Yeah. Huge back catalog online.
Go check that out now.
But yeah, also if you want to get through to us as a group.
Podcast@QI.com is our email.
You can send us your favorite facts.
If you send those to that email,
we will cherry pick the best of them and bring them to our Monday bonus show, which is called Little Fish.
So you can hear your own fact read out on the show.
Or if you just want to send us general feedback about things that we've said, little adventures you've had related to the topics that we've discussed.
You can send them in and they'll be used on Jewel.
Drop us a line, which is our mail bag episode.
And that's a sort of secret private members episode.
It's part of Club Fish.
Club Fish lives on Patreon.
Patreon.com/clubfish.
Go check it out because there's lots of really fun things there.
There's an Excel version of the episode that you've just heard.
There is a video version of Jewel on various different tiers.
We are online quizzes.
Go check it out.
It's all lots of fun.
But why is it just come back here next week?
Because we're going to be back with another episode.
A quick thank you is ever to the larger Fish Buster's team.
That's Lee and Lee and Ethan Ruperallia as well as the other gang that are involved in making this show.
And we'll see you again next week.
Good bye.
[MUSIC]
[BLANK_AUDIO]